# model2owl-boilerplate
Boilerplate for running model2owl on new projects

# Getting started
This project will use model2owl to transform a UML model into a formal OWL ontology, a SHACL shape, a conventions report
and glossary  based on established UML conventions.

Main steps:
* Fork this repository
* Put your UML model/models export (XML file) in the implementation folder
* Configure model2owl using config folder
* Change GitHub action scripts available to include your ontologies

# Usage
##Naming conventions
* The name of the created folders should not contain spaces. It can contain underscores or hyphen if it's strictly necessary 
* The name of the UML model export file should have _CM suffix in the name (i.e mymodel_CM.xml)
##Folder structure conventions
To add a new UML model follow this folder structure
```
implementation
        |___firstModel
                |___model2owl-config
                |___xmi_conceptual_model
```
##Adding a UML model
* Create a folder under implementation with the name of the UML model following the naming conventions. 
* Create xmi_conceptual_model folder inside the folder created at the previous step
* Put the UML export in the xmi_conceptual_model folder following the naming conventions
##Adding model2owl config
* Copy model2owl-config folder into UML model implementation folder created at the previous step
* Configure model2owl using the files inside model2owl-config folder
##Adjust GitHub actions
In the folder .GitHub from this repository are 2 action scripts that will transform the UML model/models.
###Generate convention report and glossary
**File name:** generate_conventions_and_glossary.yml

Configure the trigger for this action changing the following lines
```yaml
    paths:
      - "implementation/demo_ontology/xmi_conceptual_model/demo_ontology_CM.xml"
      - "implementation/demo_ontology/xmi_conceptual_model/demo_ontology_module_CM.xml"
```
If any change is detected in the files that are included in the paths config will trigger this GitHub action.
The paths should be to the UML model export file.

Configure which of the implementation should be included by changing the AVAILABLE_IMPLEMENTATIONS variable
inside the action script.
```shell
AVAILABLE_IMPLEMENTATIONS=(demo_ontology demo_ontology_module)
```
Search in the script for this variable declaration as it has multiple usage and change the value accordingly.
The values in the list should be the folder names created for the UML model under the implementation folder.

```
Example:

implementation
        |___modelOne
        |___modelTwo
        
To include both models for generating the convention report and glossary the variable should be
AVAILABLE_IMPLEMENTATIONS=(modelOne modelTwo)
```
###Transform UML model
**File name:** transform_ontology.yml

Configure the trigger for this action changing the following lines
```yaml
    paths:
      - "implementation/demo_ontology/xmi_conceptual_model/demo_ontology_CM.xml"
      - "implementation/demo_ontology/xmi_conceptual_model/demo_ontology_module_CM.xml"
```
If any change is detected in the files that are included in the paths config will trigger this GitHub action.
The paths should be to the UML model export file.

Configure which of the implementation should be included by changing the AVAILABLE_IMPLEMENTATIONS variable
inside the action script.
```shell
AVAILABLE_IMPLEMENTATIONS=(demo_ontology demo_ontology_module)
```
Search in the script for this variable declaration as it has multiple usage and change the value accordingly.
The values in the list should be the folder names created for the UML model under the implementation folder.

```
Example:

    implementation
            |___modelOne
            |___modelTwo
        
To include both models to transform into a formal OWL ontology and a SHACL shape the variable should be
AVAILABLE_IMPLEMENTATIONS=(modelOne modelTwo)
```
##Output
The output is automatically generated by the GitHub action scripts described previously. Each of the scripts will 
do an automatic commit on the branch that was executed from. To see the output executing a git pull after the GitHub 
action ran successfully is mandatory.
The scripts will generate automatically folders and transformation files under a specific structure that is presented
below.
###Output folders structure and content
Glossaries will be stored at the top level of this project outside the implementation folder, and it will 
contain the individual glossaries for the UML model and a unified glossary if there are more than one UML model to
be processed by GitHub action scripts

```
     /
    .github
    glossary
        |__static  -> folder to hold css and js neccesary for the glossary
        |__modelOne_CM-glossary.html
        |__modelTwo_CM-glossary.html
        |__ontologies-combined-glossary.html   -> combined glossary
    implementation
    model2owl-config
```
The formal OWL ontology and a SHACL shape will be inside each UML model folder under specific folders as described 
below.
```
    implementation
        |___modelOne
                |__conventions_report
                |       |__static -> folder to hold css and js neccesary for the convention report
                |       |__modelOne_CM-convention-report.html
                |__owl_ontology
                |       |__modelOne_CM-core.rdf
                |       |__modelOne_CM-core.ttl
                |       |__modelOne_CM-restrictions.rdf
                |       |__modelOne_CM-restrictions.ttl
                |__shacl_shapes
                |       |__modelOne_CM-shacl.rdf
                |       |__modelOne_CM-shacl.rdf
                |___model2owl-config
                |___xmi_conceptual_model
        |___modelTwo
```